[RFC 0108] NixOS Container rewrite (#108)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0108-nixos-containers.md

Let the following expression be called `imperative-container.nix`:

```nix
{
  config.nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
  config.config = { pkgs, ... }: {
    services.nginx.enable = true;
    networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [ 80 ];
  };

  # This implies that the "default" networking mode (i.e. DHCPv4) is used
  # and not the host's network (which is the default for imperative containers).
  config.network = {};
  config.forwardPorts = [ { hostPort = 8080; containerPort = 80; } ];
}
```

The container can be built like this now:

```
$ nixos-nspawn create imperative ./imperative-container.nix
```

The default page of `nginx` is now reachable like this:

```
$ curl imperative:80 -i
$ curl <IPv4 of the host-side veth interface>:8080 -i
```

#### Modify a container's config imperatively

When `imperative-container.nix` is updated, it can be rebuilt like this:

```
$ nixos-nspawn update imperative --config ./imperative-container.nix
```

By default, it will be **restarted**. This can be overridden via `config.activation.strategy`,
however only `reload`, `restart` and `none` are supported.

Additionally, the way how the container's new config will be activated can be specified

> via `--reload` or `--restart` passed to `nixos-nspawn update`.

Reviewer: From looking at the functionality within the POC, I think the "reload" and "none" strategies may be a little overloaded in the context of imperative containers managed like full systems of their own.

It's not clear if reload will be reloading configuration inside or outside of the container. I would expect it to be both, however the real behaviour is to `switch-to-configuration` within the container, and update the nspawn configuration on the host without actually applying any changes, since that would require a restart of the container. Also, since it's doing switch-to-configuration, all the actual services in the container will be reloaded _or restarted_ irrespective of this strategy.

I had a couple of suggestions initially, but in typing this out I think the easiest thing that could be done here is to rename `reload` to `switch`, in reference to `nixos-rebuild switch`. The consequences of this are now much more obvious and predictable given you know how nixos-rebuild works, and it maintains at least some consistency between the two commands (even though it's a flag in this case).

With that clarification, "none" does make a bit more sense as an activation strategy, but it is still a little misleading. _Something_ is being done to activate the config, it's just not immediately taking place. I think a name like "next-restart" or "boot" (again to be consistent with nixos-rebuild) would make more sense IMO.

I'm interested to hear your thoughts on this and how the strategy names came about in the first place :)

Reviewer: > reload was to remain consistent with the underlying operation (systemctl reload) for declarative containers and I decided to use the same things for imperative ones. switch is IMHO a bit ambiguous as it isn't clear how it differs from restart.

Ok yeah, I hadn't considered reading them as synonyms of `systemd reload/restart`, which does make far more sense now :) On that note, scratch my suggestion for that, however I would still be a fan of none -> boot, or possibly "onboot" to imply the event that will trigger activation.

---
feature: NixOS Container rewrite
start-date: 2021-02-14
author: Maximilian Bosch <maximilian@mbosch.me>
co-authors: n/a

> shepherd-team: n/a
> shepherd-leader: n/a

Reviewer 2: We decided on a team:

```suggestion
shepherd-team: @Mic92, @lheckemann, @SuperSandro2000, @arianvp, @Lassulus 
shepherd-leader: @Lassulus 
```

  for this to happen, a smooth migration path must be provided.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Bootstrapping

To be fully consistent with upstream `systemd`, the template unit
[`systemd-nspawn@.service`](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/blob/v247/units/systemd-nspawn@.service.in) will be used.

The approach how a container is bootstrapped won't change and will thus consist of the
following steps (executed via a custom `ExecStartPre=`-script):

* Create an empty directory in `/var/lib/machines` named like the container-name.
* `systemd-nspawn` only expects `/etc/os-release`, `/etc/machine-id` and `/var` to exist
  inside, however with no content.
* To get a running NixOS inside, `/nix/store` is bind-mounted into it. As an `init` process,
  the [stage-2 script](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/modules/system/boot/stage-2-init.sh)
  is started which eventually `exec(2)`s into `systemd` and ensures that everything
  is correctly set up.
* The option `boot.isContainer = true;` will be automatically set for new containers as well.
  This is necessary to
  * avoid bogus `modprobe` calls since `nspawn` doesn't have its own kernel.

>   * as option to skip building a `stage-1` boot script when building a NixOS system for
>     the container.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * avoid building a `stage-1` boot script and initramfs as part of the container's NixOS system
```

scope in this RFC.

## Network

The following section provides an overview of how to configure networking for containers and
how this will be implemented. A proposal how the API of the NixOS module could look like will
be demonstrated in the [next chapter](#examples-and-interactions).

### "public" networking

This is the most trivial networking mode. It is taken if the `PrivateNetwork`-option of the
`.nspawn`-unit is set to `no`. In this case, the container has full access to the host's network,
otherwise the container will run in its own namespace.

### Default Mode

If nothing else is specified, the [default settings of `systemd-nspawn`](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/blob/v247/network/80-container-ve.network) will
be used for networking. To briefly summarize, this means:

* A [`veth`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/veth.4.html) interface-pair will be created,
  one "host-side" interface and a container interface inside its own namespace.
* A subnet from a [RFC1918](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1918) private IP range
  is assigned to the host-side interface. IPv4 addresses will be distributed via DHCP to containers.

> * Analogous IPv4, a [RFC4193 IPv6 ULA prefix](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4193) will be
>   assigned to the host-side interface, containers can assign themselves addresses from this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Analogous to IPv4, a [RFC4193 IPv6 ULA prefix](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4193) will be
  assigned to the host-side interface. Containers can assign themselves addresses from this
```

  prefix by utilizing [RFC4862 SLAAC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4862).

Hosts will be available on the current system via the

> [`mymachines` `nss` module](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/nss-myhostname.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`mymachines` `nss` module](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/nss-mymachines.html).
```

This means that container names can be resolved to addresses like DNS names, i.e. `ping containername` works.

### Static networking

It's also possible to assign an arbitrary number of IPv4 and IPv6 addresses statically. This
is internally implemented by using the `Address=` setting of [`systemd.network(5)`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.network.html).

An example of how this can be done is shown in the [next chapter](#examples-and-interactions).

### DNS

The current implementation uses [`networking.useHostResolvConf`](https://search.nixos.org/options?channel=20.09&show=networking.useHostResolvConf&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&query=networking.useHostResolvConf)
to configure DNS via `/etc/resolv.conf` in the container. This option will be **deprecated** as
`systemd` can take care of it:

* If `networkd` is enabled via NixOS, [`systemd-resolved`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-resolved.service.html) is enabled as well.

>   * By default, DNS for `resolved` will be configured via DHCP which is enabled in the [Default Mode](#default-mode) by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * By default, `resolved` will be configured via DHCP which is enabled in [Default Mode](#default-mode).
```

>   * With only [Static networking](#static-networking) enabled, it is necessary to configure
>     configure DNS servers for resolved statically which can be done by setting e.g. DNS
>     servers via a `.network`-unit for the `host0` interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * With only [Static networking](#static-networking) enabled, it is necessary to configure
    DNS servers for resolved statically which can be done by setting DNS
    servers via a `.network` unit for the `host0` interface.
```

The state directory in `/var/lib/containers/<name>` is also usable by `systemd-nspawn` directly.
Thus, the following steps are necessary:

* Port existing container options to the new module (documentation describing how this can be
  done for each feature **has** to be written before this is considered ready).
* Most of the NixOS configuration can be easily reused except for the following differences:
  * `networkd` is used inside the container rather than scripted networking. This means that
    NixOS's networking configuration may require adjustment. However the basic `networking.interfaces` interface
    is also supported by the `networkd` stack. More notable is that `eth0` inside the container is
    named `host0` by default.
  * As soon as the config is ready to deploy, the state directory in `/var/lib/containers` has to
    be copied to `/var/lib/machines`.
  * Deploy & reboot.
  * See also https://github.com/Ma27/nixpkgs/blob/networkd-containers/nixos/tests/container-migration.nix as POC.

## Imperative management

`systemd` differentiates between "privileged" & "unprivileged" settings. Each privileged (also

> called "trusted") `nspawn` unit lives in `/etc/systemd/nspawn`. Since unprivileged container's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
called "trusted") `nspawn` unit lives in `/etc/systemd/nspawn`. Since unprivileged containers
```

don't allow bind mounts, these will be out of scope. Additionally, this means that
`/etc/systemd/nspawn` has to be writable for administrative users and can't be a symlink to
a store path anymore.

The new implementation is written in Python since it's expected to be more accessible than Perl
and thus more folks are willing to maintain this code (just as it was the case after porting
the VM test driver from Perl to Python).

The following features won't be available anymore in the new script:

* Start/Stop operations, logging into containers: this can be entirely done via [`machinectl(1)`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machinectl.html).
* No configuration will be made via CLI flags. Instead, the option set from the
  NixOS module will be used to declare not only the container's configuration, but also
  networking. This approach is inspired by [erikarvstedt/extra-container](https://github.com/erikarvstedt/extra-container).

But still, not all features from declarative containers are implemented here, for instance:

* One has to explicitly specify whether to restart/reload a container when updating the config.

>   This is done on purpose to avoid duplicating the logic from `switch-to-configuration.pl` here.

Reviewer: Hey there. Loving this proposal! I'm definitely going to try out the POC later.

I would like to use imperative containers to manage a fleet of NixOS installs out of band from the host, much as if they were full VMs. With old nixos-container, it was possible to create an imperative container and then update its configuration from within itself (login + nixos-rebuild) or by changing its profile in the filesystem. This has the benefit of not unnecessarily restarting the whole container. From what I understand of this proposal, nixos-nspawn would be the only way to update configuration, and I would need to make the decision myself on whether a reload or restart would be suffice.

My question is, how does this decision/flag (as described later on) impact the restart/reload of services within the container?

Author: > My question is, how does this decision/flag (as described later on) impact the restart/reload of services within the container?

By default the host's `/nix/store` is bind-mounted into a container (as it's the case with the current implementation). For your use-case I'd suggest to bind-mount `/nix/var/nix/profiles` as well, then you should be able to work with the profiles.

This is perfectly possible with the implementation, so I'd consider this an implementation detail. Do you agree?

Regarding activation: you can set `activation.strategy` to `none`, then `nixos-nspawn` won't do anything in terms of activating things. I just realized though that `nixos-container update` does a `systemctl reload` if the container is running, perhaps we should do this here as well?

Reviewer: Since my comment I took some time to read the POC PR too and deciphered what nixos-nspawn.py does. I agree that it's an implementation detail at this point, and adding the profiles bind mount is specific to my use case I should think.

I'm not sure if performing a `systemctl reload` in all cases makes sense either, as I'm unaware of the consequences of that for other attributes set within the npawn unit file (for example, would systemctl immediately make some change that doesn't require a container restart, if any such attributes exist?).

Author: > I'm not sure if performing a systemctl reload in all cases makes sense either, as I'm unaware of the consequences of that for other attributes set within the npawn unit fil

It only executes what's in `ExecReload=` if that's set, so it only activates your configuration. Does that sound reasonable to you? :)

Reviewer: Ok yeah, that makes sense then. It seems more consistent that way.

Reviewer 3: >For your use-case I'd suggest to bind-mount /nix/var/nix/profiles as well

wouldn't that result in `nixos-rebuild` within the container changing the system profile of the host? That sounds disastrous.

Author: Not with `nixos-rebuild -p`. However fair, I guess I should actually test this -use-case first.

> * IPv6 prefix delegation is turned off because `radvd`'s configuration is declaratively specified

Reviewer 4: Hmm, just in mind:
systemd has his own [prefix delegation](https://systemd.network/systemd.network.html#%5BDHCPPrefixDelegation%5D%20Section%20Options) (and [route advertisement](https://systemd.network/systemd.network.html#%5BIPv6SendRA%5D%20Section%20Options) ) why not use that?

https://systemd.network/systemd.network.html#%5BDHCPPrefixDelegation%5D%20Section%20Options

Reviewer 5: Had the same question.  But I think the answer is that we can't expect the host-side of the stack to use `systemd-networkd`  (where we'd enable prefix delegation on the host-side of the veth pair)

I'm confused about this section in general. How was this implemented before and what funtionality are we losing is not clear to me. It reads to me like   "it's up to the user to have some form of prefix delegation on the host side of the veth pair" which sounds fine. But wasn't that the case already in the old scenario?

Author: >  systemd has his own prefix delegation (and route advertisement ) why not use that?

It doesn't support dynamically allocated prefixes (i.e. `Address=::/64`) which is what's used by default.

> Had the same question. But I think the answer is that we can't expect the host-side of the stack to use systemd-networkd (where we'd enable prefix delegation on the host-side of the veth pair)

We talked about this in the shepherd's meeting, but for everyone: networkd is required on both sides.

> How was this implemented before and what funtionality are we losing is not clear to me. It reads to me like "it's up to the user to have some form of prefix delegation on the host side of the veth pair" which sounds fine. But wasn't that the case already in the old scenario?

It is a comparison to what declarative containers using networkd do (i.e. what's missing for imperative containers).

> FWIW; the upstream network file for the veth-pair does not enable prefix delegation either. it only enables DHCPServer (for ipv4) https://github.com/systemd/systemd/blob/main/network/80-container-vz.network

I know and since I was somewhat unhappy about it, I implemented it here :)

  when building the host's NixOS.

Examples are in the next chapter.

## Config activation

By default, NixOS has to decide how to activate configuration changes for a container to avoid

> e.g. unnecessary reboots, but `reload`s aren't necessarily sufficient either because e.g.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
unnecessary reboots, but `reload`s aren't necessarily sufficient either because changes such as
```

new bind mounts require a reboot. The host's `switch-to-configuration.pl` implements it like
this:

* `systemctl reload systemd-nspawn@container-name.service` runs `switch-to-configuration test`

>   inside the container `container-name` using `nsenter`.

Reviewer 3: Why not `machinectl`?

Author: We should probably cut the `nsenter`-part out because it's an (irrelevant) implementation detail.

`machinectl` isn't possible here because you can't pipe commands to `machinectl shell` and `systemd-run` will hang if you e.g. update the container's `systemd` (see e.g. https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/83432)

* When activating a new config on the host, the following things happen:
  * If the setting `Parameter=` in the container's `.nspawn`-unit is the only thing that has changed,
    a `reload` will be done. This parameter contains the `init`-script for the container's NixOS

>     and only changes if the container's NixOS config changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    and changes every time the container's NixOS config changes.
```

  * If anything else changes, `systemd-nspawn@container-name.service` will be scheduled for a restart
    which effectively reboots the container.
* This behavior can be turned off completely which means that the container where this is turned
  off won't be touched at all on `switch-to-configuration`. Additionally, it's possible to always
  force a `reload` or `restart`. See [Examples & Interactions](#examples-and-interactions) for
  details.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

### Basics

A container with a private IPv4 & IPv6 address can be configured like this:

``` nix
{
  nixos.containers.instances.demo = {
    network = {};
    config = { pkgs, ... }: {

>       environment.etc."foo".text = "bar";

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.hello ];
```
If the purpose of this line is to illustrate that NixOS options go here, I'd suggest the probably most familiar option to all NixOS users :)

    };
  };
}
```

> It's reachable locally like this thanks to the `mymachines`-feature of NSS:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's reachable locally like this thanks to systemd's `mymachines` NSS module:
```

  };
}
```

IP addresses can be statically assigned to a container as well:

``` nix
{
  nixos.containers.instances.static = {
    network = {
      v4.static.containerPool = [ "10.237.1.3/16" ];
      v6.static.containerPool = [ "2a01:4f9:4b:1659:3aa3:cafe::3/96" ];
    };
    config = {};
  };
}
```

With this change, the containers live in the given subnets and both on the host- and container-side
the network will be properly configured accordingly.

### Advanced Features

MACVLANs are an example for how every unit setting from `networkd` and `nspawn` can be used.
These are helpful to assign multiple virtual interfaces with distinct MAC addresses to a single
physical NIC.

A sub-interface which is actually part of the physical one can be moved into the container's
namespace then:

``` nix
{
  # Config for the physical interface itself with DHCP enabled and associated to a MACVLAN.
  systemd.network.networks."40-eth1" = {
    matchConfig.Name = "eth1";
    networkConfig.DHCP = "yes";
    dhcpConfig.UseDNS = "no";
    networkConfig.MACVLAN = "mv-eth1-host";
    linkConfig.RequiredForOnline = "no";
    address = lib.mkForce [];
    addresses = lib.mkForce [];
  };

>   # The host-side sub-interface of the MACVLAN. This means that the host is reachable
>   # within the (internal) network at `192.168.2.2`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # The host-side sub-interface of the MACVLAN. This means that the host is reachable
  # at `192.168.2.2`, both on the physical interface and from the container.
```

      "192.168.2.2/24"
    ];
  };
  systemd.network.netdevs."20-mv-eth1-host" = {
    netdevConfig = {
      Name = "mv-eth1-host";
      Kind = "macvlan";
    };
    extraConfig = ''
      [MACVLAN]
      Mode=bridge
    '';
  };

  # Assign a MACVLAN to a container. This is done by pure nspawn.
  systemd.nspawn.vlandemo.networkConfig.MACVLAN = "eth1";
  nixos.containers = {
    instances.vlandemo.config = {
      systemd.network = {
        networks."10-mv-eth1" = {
          matchConfig.Name = "mv-eth1";
          address = [ "192.168.2.5/24" ];
        };
        netdevs."10-mv-eth1" = {
          netdevConfig.Name = "mv-eth1";
          netdevConfig.Kind = "veth";
        };
      };
    };
  };
}
```

### Imperative containers

#### Create a container with a pinned `nixpkgs`

Let the following expression be called `imperative-container.nix`:

```nix
{
  config.nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
  config.config = { pkgs, ... }: {
    services.nginx.enable = true;
    networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [ 80 ];
  };

  # This implies that the "default" networking mode (i.e. DHCPv4) is used
  # and not the host's network (which is the default for imperative containers).

>   config.network = {};

Reviewer 3: Maybe this should be called `container.network` to avoid confusion with the `networking` namespace available in all NixOS configurations.

Author: The primary issue is something different: I think that naming the container's config-attribute `config` was a poor choice actually because we now have to do some nasty hacks such as `config.config` (and thus also `config.network` which is indeed confusing).

I'll change it to let's say `system-config`, then the file would look like this:

``` nix
{
  nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
  network = { ... };
  system-config = { pkgs, ... }: {
    # ...
    networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [ 80 ];
  };
}
```

  config.forwardPorts = [ { hostPort = 8080; containerPort = 80; } ];
}
```

The container can be built like this now:

```
$ nixos-nspawn create imperative ./imperative-container.nix
```

The default page of `nginx` is now reachable like this:

```
$ curl imperative:80 -i
$ curl <IPv4 of the host-side veth interface>:8080 -i
```

#### Modify a container's config imperatively

When `imperative-container.nix` is updated, it can be rebuilt like this:

```
$ nixos-nspawn update imperative --config ./imperative-container.nix
```

> By default, it will be **restarted**. This can be overridden via `config.activation.strategy`,

Reviewer 3: Like `network`, this could be moved into `container.activation`?

  For instance, [oneshot](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.service.html#Type=) services
  such as `nextcloud-setup.service` will hang if a database in e.g. a local network is used. Other
  examples are `rspamd` or `clamav`.

Additionally, we currently maintain a Perl script called `nixos-container.pl` which serves
as the CLI frontend for the feature. This is not only an additional maintenance burden for us, but largely duplicates functionality already provided by [`machinectl(1)`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machinectl.html).

The main reason why `machinectl` cannot be used as a complete replacement are
[imperative containers](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-imperative-containers)
and state getting lost after the `container@<container-name>.service` unit
has stopped since `.nspawn` units aren't used.

In the following section the design of a replacement is proposed with these goals:

* Use [`networkd`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.network.html) as the networking stack since `systemd-nspawn` is part of the same project and

>   thus both components are designed to work together and issues like no uplink until the container is fully booted will be fixed.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  thus both components are designed to work together and resolve issues like no uplink until the container is fully booted.
```

Nit: With "will be fixed" it isn't clear if this is *already* fixed in networkd+systemd-nspawn or if we expect that upstream will fix this issue because they work together. I think the new wording is more exact.

Author: Makes sense, applied, thanks!

  This is necessary to
  * avoid bogus `modprobe` calls since `nspawn` doesn't have its own kernel.
  * as option to skip building a `stage-1` boot script when building a NixOS system for
    the container.

This init-script can be built by evaluating a NixOS config against `<nixpkgs/nixos/lib/eval-config.nix>`.

Support for existing tarballs to be imported with `machinectl pull-tar` is explicitly out of
scope in this RFC.

## Network

The following section provides an overview of how to configure networking for containers and
how this will be implemented. A proposal how the API of the NixOS module could look like will
be demonstrated in the [next chapter](#examples-and-interactions).

### "public" networking

This is the most trivial networking mode. It is taken if the `PrivateNetwork`-option of the
`.nspawn`-unit is set to `no`. In this case, the container has full access to the host's network,
otherwise the container will run in its own namespace.

### Default Mode

If nothing else is specified, the [default settings of `systemd-nspawn`](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/blob/v247/network/80-container-ve.network) will

> be used for networking. To briefly summarize, this means:

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure if we should be too specific with the networkd config format internals here, and just describe how it'll look like from a birds-eye perspective.

* A [`veth`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/veth.4.html) interface-pair will be created,
  one "host-side" interface and a container interface inside its own namespace.
* A dynamically allocated prefix of `0.0.0.0/28` (or `0.0.0.0/24` for virtual zones) will be used

>   as address pool to distribute IPv4 addresses via DHCP to containers.

Reviewer 7: We don't use 0.0.0.0/28. This only instructs networkd to allocate a prefix in some private address range.

Author: > We don't use 0.0.0.0/28. This only instructs networkd to allocate a prefix in some private address range.

Yeah, it was my intention to describe that, but I see why this sentence can be misleading, will update that, thanks!

Additionally, basic IPv6 support was implemented:

* By specifying `::/64`, a [RFC4193 ULA prefix](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4193) will be
  allocated to the host-side interface.
* With [`radvd`](https://github.com/radvd-project/radvd), containers can assign themselves addresses from this address prefix by utilizing
  [RFC4862 SLAAC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4862)

This is necessary since `systemd-networkd` doesn't support router advertisements with

> dynamically allocated prefixes.

Reviewer 7: Same same, I'm not sure if IPv6 prefix delegation on this is a thing/will be in the future. It shouldn't be part of an RFC.

Hosts will be available on the current system via the
[`mymachines` `nss` module](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/nss-myhostname.html),

> which is already taken care of by `systemd-networkd`. This means that container names can be resolved to addresses like DNS names, i.e. `ping containername` works.

Reviewer 7: Hostnames of local container instances can be looked up on the host, but that's nothing networkd is taking care of. It's provided by nss-mymachines for all containers registered with systemd-machined.

Again, I don't think the RFC should cover systemd internals that much - it's probably sufficient to say they'll be available for local host resolution.

  done for each feature **has** to be written before this is considered ready).
* Most of the NixOS configuration can be easily reused except for the following differences:
  * `networkd` is used inside the container rather than scripted networking. This means that
    NixOS's networking configuration may require adjustment. However the basic `networking.interfaces` interface
    is also supported by the `networkd` stack. More notable is that `eth0` inside the container is
    named `host0` by default.
  * As soon as the config is ready to deploy, the state directory in `/var/lib/containers` has to
    be copied to `/var/lib/machines`.
  * Deploy & reboot.
  * See also https://github.com/Ma27/nixpkgs/blob/networkd-containers/nixos/tests/container-migration.nix as POC.

## Imperative management

`systemd` differentiates between "privileged" & "unprivileged" settings. Each privileged (also
called "trusted") `nspawn` unit lives in `/etc/systemd/nspawn`. Since unprivileged container's
don't allow bind mounts, these will be out of scope. Additionally, this means that
`/etc/systemd/nspawn` has to be writable for administrative users and can't be a symlink to

> a store path anymore.

Reviewer 7: nspawn files can also be read from /run/systemd/nspawn and /var/lib/machines/. I don't see why /etc/systemd/nspawn needs to be writable.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/systemd/systemd/blob/3b5816ba3362f046f317d4d20dc8bc3153a750fd/src/nspawn/nspawn.c#L4632-L4634
`/run/systemd/nspawn` is in fact trusted by default; however, this is not documented by upstream so I think we should open an issue to make sure this behaviour doesn't change unexpectedly. I'm also not sure to what extent this is useful, since AFAIK we want imperative containers to persist.

Author: `systemd.nspawn(5)` explicitly documents that `/etc/systemd/nspawn` is trusted, so I suggest we stick to that:

```
Persistent settings files created and maintained by the administrator (and thus trusted) should be placed in /etc/systemd/nspawn/, while automatically downloaded (and thus potentially untrusted)
settings files are placed in /var/lib/machines/ instead (next to the container images), where their security impact is limited. In order to add privileged settings to .nspawn files acquired from the
image vendor, it is recommended to copy the settings files into /etc/systemd/nspawn/ and edit them there, so that the privileged options become available.
```

e.g. unnecessary reboots, but `reload`s aren't necessarily sufficient either because e.g.
new bind mounts require a reboot. The host's `switch-to-configuration.pl` implements it like
this:

* `systemctl reload systemd-nspawn@container-name.service` runs `switch-to-configuration test`
  inside the container `container-name` using `nsenter`.
* When activating a new config on the host, the following things happen:
  * If the setting `Parameter=` in the container's `.nspawn`-unit is the only thing that has changed,
    a `reload` will be done. This parameter contains the `init`-script for the container's NixOS
    and only changes if the container's NixOS config changes.
  * If anything else changes, `systemd-nspawn@container-name.service` will be scheduled for a restart
    which effectively reboots the container.
* This behavior can be turned off completely which means that the container where this is turned
  off won't be touched at all on `switch-to-configuration`. Additionally, it's possible to always
  force a `reload` or `restart`. See [Examples & Interactions](#examples-and-interactions) for

>   details.

Reviewer 7: This feels like a lot of (maybe unnecessary) complexity, especially the `nsenter` part.

Could we just activate the new configuration inside the container on a reload, and restart the container if any of the mounts in the .nspawn file has changed?

We could provide some option to always force a container restart.

Reviewer 8: why does the container need to be restarted when the port forwards change? How exactly do they affect the container side of things?

Author: The `reload` only does a `switch-to-configuration` and thus only alters what happens *inside* the container. To activate the port-forward (via systemd), you can currently only reboot.
